---
layout: post
title: "Planescape: Torment could have been more"
date: Mon, 09 Sep 2013 11:00:00 +0000
comments: true
categories: gaming
---
In contrast to Fallout 2, which I finished in my early teens, I got around to
playing through *Planescape: Torment* about half a year ago. Just as everyone
around the net had said, it was a world to get lost in, with interesting
characters, ample amounts of dialogue and a captivating setting that let the
imagination flow.

While I could talk at length about the many things that make this game so
remarkable, others have already done this many times over; "Final frontier"
wrote [a good blog post on the subject](
https://medium.com/final-frontier/35ffb4e847cc) about a month ago, well worth
reading.

Instead, I'd like to talk about what I felt was missing in this beautiful game.

<!--more-->

(There will be spoilers, so you might want to finish the game first.)

{% imgcap http://th08.deviantart.net/fs11/PRE/i/2006/182/0/8/The_Planescape_Multiverse_by_zen79.jpg [The Planescape Multiverse](http://zen79.deviantart.com/art/The-Planescape-Multiverse-35619350) %}

## Planescape smorgasbord

Throughout the course of the game, the Nameless One will spend most of his time
in the city of Sigil, a torus sitting at the top of the infinitely tall
mountain Spire. Ruled by the Lady of Pain, it's a place of absolute neutrality,
both with regards to Good versus Evil and Law versus Chaos. It's a place which
the [Lady of Pain](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lady_of_Pain) doesn't allow to
slant to a specific alignment and is therefore used as a hub for creatures from
all of the other planes. Also, it's (if I recall the setting correctly) a place
which souls inhabit after arriving from the Prime Material Plane, until they
show a definitive alignment which would allow them to travel to the respective
plane for that alignment.

Essentially this gives the player the opportunity to experience a tiny piece of
every plane.

We get to speak to the Abishai from the world of Lawful-Evil, Baator;
unscrupulous creatures speaking of a world where cruelty, treachery and deceit
is commonplace. We get to travel with a Githzerai, formerly an inhabitant of
the plane of Limbo, an ever-changing place where strong will of the individual
actually shapes the world around him. We get to hear the thoughts of a Modron,
an inhabitant of Mechanus, an infinite plane constructed out of giant cogs,
guarded by gear spirits.

There are so many stories that one gets to hear, but we don't really get to see
them. *We get a wealth of excellently crafted samples for tasting, but never the
whole meal*.

I wanted to see Mount Celestia and its inhabitants, beings embodying
Lawful-Good. I wanted to see the verdant plane of Arborea and I wanted to see
the home plane of my Githzerai companion, Limbo.

I realize this would have exceeded the budget and scope of the game that Black
Isle was creating, but at the end of the game, when I had somewhat digested
what a fantastic experience the game was, I couldn't help but say to myself:

**"There's so much more that I want to see."**

## Underwhelming worlds

When I played the game, I found the world so intriguing that I made an effort
to talk to as many different characters as possible. The writing of the dialog
and the amount of different stories they had to tell kept me glued to the
screen. As mentioned above, the imagination was constantly flowing.

This made the occasional trips outside of Sigil disappointing, since I had made
up these fantastic worlds in my head which the game could not live up to. Yes,
that's a normal situation, I know: when you have a fantastic place described to
you through the medium of text, be it a book or (as in this game) ample amounts
of dialogue, an artist's rendition of that will often disappoint (hence the
very often occurrence of "the book was so much better").

Still, when I set foot in Baator, I expected more than a bunch of hostile
creatures amidst some piles of red rocks. Sure the Pillar of Skulls was
a deeply satisfying thing to interact with, but the plane which it was on very
much wasn't; Baator was not much more than a gauntlet of enemies.

Carceri was a plane placed between the Gray Waste (Neutral-Evil) and the Abyss
(Chaotic-Evil), and yet it didn't feel much different from the streets of
Sigil. It's supposedly "The prison realm" but the plane's character or
alignment didn't shine through. Even the city's descent into chaos due to the
influence of Trias didn't feel as impactful as it could have been. While I was
very happy to see that Trias power (drawn from the evil of the citizens) was
affected by how many people you converted to make good deeds, the setting
itself only changed in the sense that there was an ongoing invasion from the
adjacent plane. My imagination had told me that a shift in a plane's alignment
introduced huge changes, where as in the game it was not much more than a shift
in the behaviour of the inhabitants.

Once again, I understand that creating something like that costs money and
time, something which the developers might not have had at that point, but it's
something that keeps bugging me.

What transpired in Baator and in Carceri was necessary for the story to
progress and the events themselves were well written, but the planes left me
wishing for far more.

## Hope for Numenera

With all of the above said I'd like to reiterate that there's a great amount of
things I could praise the game for. I wrote this because I wanted one of the
best games I've played to be even better.

With *Torment: Tides of Numenera* in the hands of a remarkable team, I'm sure
that the spiritual successor to *Planescape: Torment* will be a great
experience. What I'm hoping, though, is that they'll be able keep everything
that was great about the original but surpass its scope.

With the team that inExile has assembled, it just might be possible.
